---
title: Latis, a command-line spreadsheet toy
icon: grid_4x4

layout: post
---

{% include project.html 
   github="https://github.com/ambuc/latis" %}

* TOC
{:toc}

# Background

I wrote a command-line spreadsheet toy in C++. It renders as a
[TUI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text-based_user_interface) and implements an
Excel-like grammar for defining formulae. The full source is
[here](https://github.com/ambuc/latis).

# Design

In-scope for this project:

*  Designing an [ABNF grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)
*  Writing a system for lexing, parsing, and evaluating user input.
*  Writing a TUI for rendering spreadsheets interactively.
*  Using C++. (Mostly to learn about OSS [Bazel](https://bazel.build/),
   [absl](https://abseil.io/docs/cpp/), and
   [protobuffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers).

Out-of-scope:

*  A fully-featured spreadsheet app which is easy to use or interoperates with
   other spreadsheet formats.

## Design Overview

A spreadsheet program needs to have individual cells, each of which either has:

*  a typed value (a string value, a numeric value, or a monetary value, to name
   a few) or
*  a formula which is dependent on zero or more cells and which returns a typed
   value.

User input must be [lexed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexical_analysis)
(broken up into a series of meaningful tokens),
[parsed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsing#Parser), (turned from a series of
tokens into a data structure via a formal grammar), and evaluated (rendered to a
typed value). The degenerate case of this lex-parse-evaluate pipeline is a
single typed value.

The program must also maintain a graph of cells and their dependencies on each
other. If cell `A` depends on cell `B`, and cell `B` is updated, the rendering
of cell `A` (but not its underlying formula) must also be updated. Furthermore,
cells depending on `A` must be updated, and so on and so forth.

Finally, there should be some decoupling between the spreadsheet data structure
and the onscreen contents. This design problem is often solved using the
[MVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
pattern, and was far and away the most complex part of this project, since I
foolishly insisted on using C++ and writing myself not only the spreadsheet but
the underlying MVC tools and frameworks.

## ABNF Grammar

As mentioned above, a spreadsheet which can lex, parse, and evaluate user input
must attempt to understand that input according to a
[grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formal_grammar). I chose to design a
grammar using
[ABNF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form), which
is a manner of specifying grammar using some rules. ABNF already defines some
bottom-level terminal values (numerics, literals, etc.) which make defining a
grammar easier. Here is the grammar I ended up with:

### Notes on ABNF:

*  Anything in double quotes is a literal, i.e. `-` might mean a range of
   values, but `"-"` means the literal `-` character.
*  Anything on a line after `;` is a comment.
*  `%c` means a single text character.
*  `%d` means a decimal digit.
*  `0-9` means a range of values.
*  `<a>*<b>e` means between `a` and `b` instances of `e`. If `a` is not 
   specified, the default lower bound is 0. If `b` is not specified, the
   default upper bound is infinity. So `1*e` means one or more instances of `e`.
*  `<a>e` means `e` exactly `a` times.
*  `X / Y` means either `X` or `Y`.
*  `[e]` means that `e` is optional, i.e. shorthand for `0*1e`.

```
DIGIT            = %d0-9

DATE_FULLYEAR    = 4DIGIT
DATE_MONTH       = 2DIGIT  ; 01-12
DATE_MDAY        = 2DIGIT  ; 01-28, 01-29, 01-30, 01-31 based on month/year
TIME_HOUR        = 2DIGIT  ; 00-23
TIME_MINUTE      = 2DIGIT  ; 00-59
TIME_SECOND      = 2DIGIT  ; 00-58, 00-59, 00-60 based on leap second rules
TIME_SECFRAC     = "." 1*DIGIT
TIME_NUMOFFSET   = ("+" / "-") TIME_HOUR ":" TIME_MINUTE
TIME_OFFSET      = "Z" / time_numoffset
DATE_TIME        = DATE_FULLYEAR "-" DATE_MONTH "-" DATE_MDAY "T"
                   TIME_HOUR ":" TIME_MINUTE ":" TIME_SECOND [TIME_SECFRAC] 
                   TIME_OFFSET

UPPERCASE        = %c"A"-"Z"
ALPHANUMERIC     = 1*(UPPERCASE / DIGIT)

INT_NUMERIC      = 1*DIGIT
DOUBLE_NUMERIC   = *DIGIT "." *DIGIT
NUM_VAL          = INT_NUMERIC |
DOUBLE_NUMERIC

CURRENCY_ENUM    = "USD" / "SEK" / ...
CURRENCY_VAL     = NUM_VAL CURRENCY_ENUM

STR_VAL          = "\"" *e "\""

ROW_INDICATOR    = 1*DIGIT
COL_INDICATOR    = 1*UPPERCASE

LOCATION_VAL     = COL_INDICATOR ROW_INDICATOR     ; A1
RANGE_VAL        = COL_INDICATOR ":" COL_INDICATOR ; A:B
                 / LOCATION_VAL ":" ROW_INDICATOR  ; A1:3
                 / LOCATION_VAL ":" LOCATION_VAL   ; A1:B3

BOOL_VAL         = "True" / "False"

VAL              = CURRENCY_VAL / DATE_TIME / NUM_VAL / STR_VAL 
                 / LOCATION_VAL / RANGE_VAL / BOOL_VAL 

FN               = 1*(ALPHANUMERIC / "_") 

EXPR             = VAL ; 4
                 / "(" EXPR ")" ; (5)
                 / "(" EXPR FN EXPR ")" ; (1+1)
                 / FN "(" EXPR *( "," EXPR) ")" ; POW(2,4,6)
                 / EXPR "?" EXPR ":" EXPR ; cond ?  val1 : val2

GRAMMAR          = "=" EXPR
```

## Lexing

When lexing, we convert a string of user input into a linear sequence of
meaningful tokens. Things get very verbose at this stage. We define an enum `T`
of possible lex types, and store tokens as:

```c++
struct Token {
  enum T {
    equals, //  =
    period, //  .
    ...
  };
  T type
  std::string_view value;
```

where each `Token` holds a reference to the substring of user input it
represents.

For example, lexing might turn a string like:

```
=POW(4.605, 2)
00000000001111
01234567890123
```

into a sequence of tokens like:

| substring | type         | start | length |
|-----------|--------------|-------|--------|
| `=`       | `T::equals`  |     0 |      1 |
| `POW`     | `T::alpha`   |     1 |      3 |
| `(`       | `T::lparen`  |     4 |      1 |
| `4.605`   | `T::numeric` |     5 |      5 |
| `,`       | `T::comma`   |    10 |      1 |
| `2`       | `T::numeric` |    12 |      1 |
| `)`       | `T::rparen`  |    13 |      1 |

By passing around types _and_ underlying substrings, we can parse the contents
of alphanumeric tokens lazily, i.e. only when necessary.

### Note on std::string_view

[`std::string_view`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/header/string_view)
represents a read-only view into an existing character buffer. So long as the
underlying string doesn't vanish, the constructed string_view is a small data
structure suitable for passing by-value (or mutating in-place) without the
overhead of copying an arbitrary-length string.

## Parsing

Parsing is the process of taking a series of lexical tokens (as described above)
and generating a useful data structure (read: tree) which can be stored, 
traversed, evaluated, manipulated, and displayed. This process happens
hand-in-hand with the grammar defined above, and some tools can read ABNF
grammars or other regular grammars and spit out parsers. I chose to hand-roll my
own. This was the most challenging and educational aspect of this project by
far.

### Parser combinators

I used the [parser-combinator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parser_combinator)
style; that is, I wrote a set of low-level parsers (one which parses into a
character, one which parses into a number, etc.) and then a set of higher-order
parsers, which combine two or more parsers and return a new parser.

Before we get into how this works, we need some background on `absl::Status`,
`StatusOr<T>`, `absl::Span`, `absl::variant`, and `absl::bind_front`.

#### absl::Status

[`absl::Status`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/status/status.h) 
is a C++ error handling class which encapsulates a typed error
(`kInvalidArgument`, `kPermissionDenied`, etc.) and a human-readable string
payload.

#### `???::StatusOr<T>`

`::StatusOr<T>` is the [sum type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tagged_union) 
of a value of type `T` and an `absl::Status`. It doesn't exist (yet!) in `absl`,
but other OSS libraries
[hint](https://googleapis.dev/cpp/google-cloud-common/0.4.0/classgoogle_1_1cloud_1_1v0_1_1StatusOr.html)
[at](http://www.furidamu.org/blog/2017/01/28/error-handling-with-statusor/) 
[its](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf/blob/master/src/google/protobuf/stubs/statusor.h) 
[existence](https://asylo.dev/doxygen/classasylo_1_1StatusOr.html). Since my
project already imported `"google/protobuf"`, I decided to use
`"google/protobuf/stubs/statusor.h"`, which exposes
`::google::protobuf::util::StatusOr<T>`. One day this may be a part of `absl`.

#### `absl::Span`

[`absl::Span`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/types/span.h)
is the same idea as `std::string_view`, only it applies to other containers
beyond strings. Think of it as a read-only view into a container. Notably, it
can be passed by-reference or mutated in-place.

#### `absl::variant`

[`absl::variant`](https://github.com/abseil/abseil-cpp/blob/master/absl/types/variant.h)
is a union type of one or more typed values. It holds exactly one value of one
of its types. So a value of type `absl::Variant<int, double> numeric` could hold
either an integer or a double. 

One could use `std::get<int>(numeric)` to access the underlying integer type, 
but `std::get` excepts (`std::bad_variant_access`) if the underlying variant
holds a type other than the one specified. Instead it is idiomatic to use the
visitor pattern:

```c++
struct Visitor {
  void operator()(const int& i) const {
    std::cout << "Int: " << i;
  }
  void operator()(const double& i) const {
    std::cout << "Double: " << i;
  }
};

absl::variant<int, double> numeric = 123.456;
Visitor visitor;
absl::visit(visitor, numeric); // Prints "double: 123.456";
```

This is a little complicated, but the benefits outweigh the costs.

#### `absl::bind_front`

Finally, `absl::bind_front` and `std::bind_front` both implement partial
function application. Here is an example:

```c++
// |minus| is a function with two arguments.
int minus(int a, int b) {
  return a - b;
}

// But |fifty_minus| is a function with only one argument; 
auto fifty_minus = std::bind_front(minus, 50);

int fifty_minus_three = fifty_minus(3); // outputs 47.
```

We can use this to stage partially-evaluated methods which already have their
first `n` arguments and are waiting on their last `m` arguments, and can be
thunked later.

### Back to Parser Combinators

### What is a Parser? 

If a lexer spits out a vector of tokens, define a `using TSpan =
absl::Span<const Token>`, where a `TSpan` is a _mutable_ span of _immutable_
tokens. That is, it is a sliding window which can be slid to any starting node
and length, but there is no risk of mutating the underlying tokens.

In Latis, a parser has this type:

```c++
template <typename T>
using Prsr = std::function<StatusOr<T>(TSpan *)>;
```

that is, a parser takes a pointer to a `TSpan`, _may_ mutate that `TSpan`
in-place, and returns either a value of type `T` or an `absl::Status` explaining
why it was unable to parse the input. 

NB: This parser definition attempts to parse the _head_ of some input, not the
entire body. A successful parse will truncate the token span, leaving a shorter
span suitable for running through anothe parser.

### What is a Parser combinator?

A parser combinator is a higher-order function; it accepts as arguments one or
more function(s) and returns another function. 

Here are some existing parsers:

```c++
StatusOr<int> ConsumeInt(TSpan *tspan);
StatusOr<double> ConsumeDouble(TSpan *tspan);
```

And here is a parser combinator:

```c++
template <typename... O>
static std::function<StatusOr<absl::variant<O...>>(TSpan *)> 
AnyVariant(StatusOr<O>(TSpan *)>... ls);
```

This parser combinator (named `AnyVariant`) uses [variadic
templates](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/cpp/ellipses-and-variadic-templates?view=vs-2019)
to accept a series of any number of parsers (i.e. any number of inputs of type
`StatusOr<O>(TSpan *)`, and returns a parser whose return type is 
`absl::variant<O...>`.

We can use a parser combinator like `AnyVariant` to write a parser which
attempts to parse the input as _either_ an int _or_ a double:

```c++
StatusOr<absl::Variant<double, int>> ConsumeNumeric(TSpan *tspan) {
  return AnyVariant<double, int>(
    absl::bind_front(&ConsumeDouble, this),
    absl::bind_front(&ConsumeInt, this))(tspan);
}
```

NB: Recall that `AnyVariant<O...>(...)` itself returns a parser. So we need to
call it like so: `AnyVariant<O...>(...)(...)`.

### Other useful parser combinators:

In addition to `AnyVariant`, I also wrote:

*  `Any<T>`, which takes one or more parsers of type `T` and returns one parser
   returning type `T`, which atempts to match the parsers in priority order.
*  `Maybe<T>`, which takes exactly one parser and returns another lenient
   parser, which reads from `TSpan` but does not fail if it fails to match. This
   is useful for implementing optional aspects of the grammar, such as
   `TIME_SECFRAC` in the timespec.
*  `WithRestriction<T>`, which takes exactly one parser and an filtering
   function, and returns a parser which only returns a value of type `T` if it
   passes that filtering function. This is useful for introducing logic into our
   parser, such as recognizing a numeric value as representing a number of hours
   if and only if it is in the range `[0-24]`.
*  `InSequence<std::tuple<O...>>(Prsr<O>...)`, which takes a sequence of parsers
   and attempts to match them all, in-sequence, returning a `std::tuple<>` of
   their outputs. This is useful for matching all-or-nothing of a subgrammar,
   such as datetime specifications, which are only valid if they match the
   entire `DATE_FULLYEAR-DATE_MONTH-DATE_MDAY...` grammar. Otherwise this
   returns `Status`, and we do not truncate the `TSpan`.
*  `WithTransformation`, which is like `WithRestriction`, except it takes
   exactly one parser and exactly one transformation function which can convert
   the parsed value to some other value of some other type.
*  `WithLookup`, which accepts exactly one parser and exactly one lookup
   function. It is useful for looking up the returned value as the key in some
   map and returning its value instead. It can be thought of as a synonym for
   `WithRestriction` where the restriction is being-in-the-map, and
   `WithTransformation` where the transformation is
   to-the-matching-value-in-the-map.

The full list of combinators (and their implementations) lives here:
https://github.com/ambuc/latis/blob/master/src/formula/parser_combinators.h.

### Parsing, altogether.

In the end we compose many parser combinators and parsers into one big function,
which accepts user input and outputs a data structure (actually a
[protobuffer](https://github.com/ambuc/latis/blob/master/proto/latis_msg.proto))
which contains nested formulae, expressions, values, string literals, and table
lookup locations.

### Evaluation

Evaluation is comparatively simple: we walk the data structure described above
and "crunch" the component parts. If a node is a table lookup, we perform that
lookup (or fail). If a node is a mathematical expression, we evaluate that
expression. 

In practice this means translating `MINUS(A4, A3)` -> `3.4 - 1.2` -> `2.2`. This
is relatively
[simple](https://github.com/ambuc/latis/blob/master/src/formula/evaluator.h).

# TODO(ambuc): Write about the MVC part.
