---
problem: 3.4.1.8
layout: problem
textbook: ctfs
qed: true
---

> Let $S = \\{1,2,3,4\\}$.
>
> _a)_ Find a preorder $R \subseteq S\times S$ such that the set $R$ is as small
> as possible. Is it a partial order? Is it a linear order?

A preorder must be reflexive and transitive. The smallest binary relation
$(S,\leqslant)$ which is a preorder is $R := \\{(1,1),(2,2),(3,3),(4,4)\\}$. 

$R$ must be at least $\abs{S}$ elements large in order to satisfy reflexivity,
since it must be the case that $s \leqslant s$ for each element $s \in S$. This
is also enough to satisfy transitivity, since $\dfrac{1 \leqslant 1 \qquad 1
\leqslant 1}{1 \leqslant 1}$.

A partial order must also be such that $\dfrac{s \leqslant s' \qquad s'
\leqslant s''}{s \leqslant s''}$. This is true for the small $R$ defined above,
and holds for $s = s' = s''$ for any value in $S$.

A linear order must also be comparable; for two distinct $s, s' \in S$, it must
be the case that either $s \leqslant s'$ or $s' \leqslant s$. This is _not_ the
case for $R$, since $\leqslant$ is not defined on the entirety of $S\times S$.

Drawn visually:

    .  1  2  3  4
    1  o
    2     o
    3        o
    4           o

> _b)_ Find a preorder $R' \subseteq S\times S$ such that the set $R'$ is as
> large as possible. Is it a partial order? Is it a linear order?

The largest possible preorder is $R' := \\{(s, s') \forall s, s' \in S\\}$, i.e.
congruent to $S \times S$.

Drawn visually:

    .  1  2  3  4
    1  o  o  o  o
    2  o  o  o  o
    3  o  o  o  o
    4  o  o  o  o

It is plain to see that $R'$ is reflexive and transitive.

$R'$ is _not_ antisymmetric, since (for example) $1 \leqslant 2$ and $2
\leqslant 1$, but $1 \neq 2$. So $R'$ is not a partial order or a linear order.
