---
problem: 4.1.2.21
layout: problem
textbook: ctfs
---

> We can rephrase our notion of functor in terms compatible with Exercise
> 4.1.1.23. we would begin by saying that a functor
> $F:\mathcal{C}\to\mathcal{C}'$ consists of two functions:
>
> $$\text{Ob}(F):\text{Ob}(\mathcal{C})\to\text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}')$$
>
> and
>
> $$\text{Hom}_F:\text{Hom}_\mathcal{C}\to\text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'}$$
>
> which we call the _on-objects_ part and the _on-morphisms_ part, respectively.
> They must follow some rules, expressed by the commutativity of the following
> squares in $\textbf{Set}$.
>
> $$
> \require{AMScd}
> \begin{CD}
> {\text{Hom}}_{\mathcal{C}} @>\text{dom}>> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}) \\
> @V{\text{Hom}_F}VV @VV{\text{Ob}(F)}V \\
> \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'} @>>\text{dom}> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}')
> \end{CD}
> $$
>
> $$
> \require{AMScd}
> \begin{CD}
> {\text{Hom}}_{\mathcal{C}} @>\text{cod}>> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}) \\
> @V{\text{Hom}_F}VV @VV{\text{Ob}(F)}V \\
> \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'} @>>\text{cod}> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}')
> \end{CD}
> $$
>
> $$
> \require{AMScd}
> \begin{CD}
> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}) @>\id>> \text{Hom}_\mathcal{C} \\
> @V{\text{Ob}(F)}VV @VV{\text{Hom}_F}V \\
> \text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}') @>>\id> \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'}
> \end{CD}
> $$
>
> $$
> \require{AMScd}
> \begin{CD}
> \text{Hom}_\mathcal{C} \times_{\text{Ob}(\mathcal{C})} \text{Hom}_\mathcal{C} @>\circ>> \text{Hom}_\mathcal{C} \\
> @VVV @VV{\text{Hom}_F}V \\
> \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'} \times_{\text{Ob}(\mathcal{C}')} \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'} @>\circ>> \text{Hom}_{\mathcal{C}'}
> \end{CD}
> $$
>
> Where does the (unlabeled) left-hand function in the bottom right diagram come
> from? Hint: use Exercise 2.5.1.19.
>
> Consider Diagram (4.2) and imagine it as though contained in a pane of glass.
> Then imagine a parallel pane of glass involving $\mathcal{C}'$ in place of
> $\mathcal{C}$ everywhere.
>
> _a)_ Draw arrows from the $\mathcal{C}$ to the $\mathcal{C}'$ pane, each
> labeled $\text{Ob}(F)$ or $\text{Hom}\_F$ as seems appropriate.
>
> _b)_ If $F$ is a functor (i.e. satisifies (4.4) and (4.5)), do all the squares
> in your drawing commute?
>
> _c_) Does the definition of functor involve anything not captured in this
> setup?
