---
title: Category Theory for Scientists, Ch. 3.1
layout: post
icon: project-diagram
categories: Psets
tags: mathematics category-theory ctfs-2013
---

This pset works through [_Category Theory for Scientists_][1], covering
[Chapters 3.1][2] and all exercises in section 3.1.

You can follow along with the [textbook][3] at home. 

All solutions are my own; feel free to [email me](james.adam.buckland@gmail.com)
with corrections.

[1]: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-s996-category-theory-for-scientists-spring-2013/index.htm
[2]: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-s996-category-theory-for-scientists-spring-2013/textbook/MIT18_S996S13_chapter2.pdf
[3]: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-s996-category-theory-for-scientists-spring-2013/textbook/

# 3.1.1.6 

> Let $M = \N$ be the set of natural numbers. Taking $e=1$, come up with a formula
> for $\star$ that gives $\N$ the structure of a monoid.

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.7 

> Come up with an operation on the set $M = \\{1,2,3,4\\}$, i.e. a legitimate
> function $f: M \times M \to M$, such that $f$ cannot be the multiplication
> formula fro a monoid on $M$. That is, either it is not associative, or no
> element of $M$ can serve as a unit.

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.8 

> In both Example 3.1.1.3 and Exercise 3.1.1.6, the monoids $(M,e,\star)$
> satisfied an additional rule called \textit{commutativity}, namely $m\star n =
> n\star m$ for every $m,n \in M$. There is a monoid $(M, e, \star)$ lurking in
> linear algebra textbooks that is not commutative; if you have a background in
> linear algebra try to answer this: what $M$, $e$, and $\star$ might I be
> referring to?

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.9 

> Recall the notion of commutativity for monoids from Exercise 3.1.1.8.
> 
> **a)** What is the smallest set $M$ that you can give the structure of a
> non-commutative monoid?
> 
> **b)** What is the smallest set $M$ that you can give the structure of a
> monoid?

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.16 

> Let $\\{1\\}$ denote a one-element set.
> 
> **a)** What is the free monoid generated by $\\{1\\}$?
>
> **b)** What is the free monoid generated by $\emptyset$?

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.21 

> Let's consider the buffer concept again (see Application 3.1.1.20), but this
> time only having size 3 rather than 32. Show using Definitiopn 3.1.1.17 that
> with relations given by $\sim_1$ we indeed have $[a,b,c,d,e,f] = [a,b,f]$ and
> that with relations given by $\sim_2$ we indeed have $[a,b,c,d,e,f] = [a,b,c]$.

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.22 

> Let $K := \\{BS,a,b,c,...z\\}$, a set having 27 elements. Suppose you want to
> think of $BS \in K$ as the "backspace key" and the elements $a,b,c...,z\in K$ as
> the letter keys on a keyboard. Then the free monoid $\text{List}(K)$ is not
> quite appropriate as a model because we want $[a,b,d,BS] = [a,b]$.
> 
> **a)** Choose a set of relations for which the monoid presented by generators
> $K$ and the chosen relations is appropriate for this application.
> 
> **b)** Under your relations, how does $[BS]$ compare with $[]$? Is that
> suitable?

<hr/>

# 3.1.1.27 

> Classify all the cyclic monoids up to isomorphism. That is, come up with a
> naming system such that every cyclic monoid can be given a name in your
> system, such that no two non-isomorphic cyclic monoids have the same name, and
> such that no name exists in the system unless it refers to a cyclic monoid.

<hr/>

# 3.1.2.4 

> **a)** Realize the set $T := [0,12) \subseteq \R$ as the coequalizer of a pair
> of arrows $\R \rightrightarrows \R$.
>
> **b)** For any $x \in \R$, realize the mapping $x \cdot - : T \to T$, implied
> by Example 3.1.2.3, using the universal property of coequalizers.
>
> **c)** Prove that it is an action.

<hr/>

# 3.1.2.5 

> Let $B$ denote the set of buttons (or positions) of a video game controller
> (other than, say 'start' and 'select'), and consider the free monoid
> $\text{List}(B)$ on $B$.
> 
> **a)** What would it mean for $\text{List}(B)$ to act on the set of states of
> some game? Imagine a video game $G'$ that uses the controller, but for which
> $\text{List}(B)$ would not be said to act on the states of $G'$. Now imagine a
> simple game $G$ for which $\text{List}(B)$ would be said to act.
>
> **b)** Can you think of a state $s$ of $G$, and two distinct elements $\ell,
> \ell' \in \text{List}(B)$ such that $\ell \circlearrowright s = \ell'
> \circlearrowright s$ ? In video game parlance, what would you call an element
> $b\in B$ such that, for every state $s \in G$, one has $b \circlearrowright s
> = s$?
>
> **c)** In video game parlance, what would you call a state $s \in S$ such
> that, for every sequence of buttons $\ell \in \text{List}(B)$, one has $\ell
> \circlearrowright s = s$?

<hr/>

# 3.1.3.3 

> Let $\N$ be the additive monoid of natural numbers, let $S =
> \\{0,1,2,...,11\\}$, and let $\cdot:\N\times S \to S$ be the action given in
> example 3.1.2.3. Using a nice small generating set for the monoid, write out
> the corresponding action table.

<hr/>

# 3.1.4.6 

> For any $m \in \N$ let $i_m : \N \to \Z$ be the function $i_m(n) = m \ast n$.
> All such functions are monoid homomorphisms $(\N,0,+) \to (\Z,0,+)$. Do any
> monoid homomorphisms $(\N,0,+) \to (\Z,0,+)$ not come in this way? For
> example, what about using $n \mapsto 5\ast n - 1$ or $n \mapsto n^2$ or some
> other function?

<hr/>

# 3.1.4.7 

> Let $\mathcal{M} := (\N, 0, +)$ be the addivite monoid of natural numbers, let
> $\mathcal{N} = (\R_{\geqslant 0}, 0, +)$ be the additive monoid of nonnegative
> real numbers, and let $\mathcal{P} := (\R_{>0}, 1, \ast)$ be the
> multiplicitive monoid of positive real numbers. Can you think of any
> nontrivial monoid homomorphisms of the following sorts:
> 
> $$ \mathcal{M}\to\mathcal{N},\qquad \mathcal{M}\to\mathcal{P},\qquad
> \mathcal{N}\to\mathcal{P},\qquad \mathcal{N}\to\mathcal{M},\qquad
> \mathcal{P}\to\mathcal{N} \quad ?  $$

<hr/>

# 3.1.4.10 

> Let $G = \\{a,b\\}$, let $\mathcal{M} := (M,e,\star)$ be any monoid, and let
> $f: G\to M$ be given by $f(a) = m$ and $f(b) = n$, where $m,n\in M$. If $\psi:
> \hbs(G,M) \to \hbm(F(G), \mathcal{M})$ is the function from the proof of
> Proposition 3.1.4.9 and $L = [a,a,b,a,b]$, what is $\psi(f)(L)$?

<hr/>

# 3.1.4.15 

> Let $\N$ be the free monoid on one generator, let $\Sigma = \\{a,b\\}$, and
> let $S = \\{\text{State 0}, \text{State 1}, \text{State 2}\\}$. Consider the
> map of monoids $f: \N \to \text{List}(\Sigma)$ given by sending $1 \mapsto
> [a,b,b]$.  The monoid action $\alpha: \text{List}(\Sigma) \times S \to S$
> given in Example 3.1.3.1 can be transformed by restriction of scalars along
> $f$ to an action $\Delta_f(\alpha)$ of $\N$ on $S$. Write down its action
> table.

