---
problem: 2.7.5.9 
layout: problem
textbook: ctfs
qed: true
---

> Consider the subobject classifier $\Omega$, the singleton $\\{1\\}$ and the
> map $\\{1\\} \xrightarrow{\text{True}} \Omega$ from Definition 2.7.4.9. Look
> at diagram 2.44 and in the spirit of Exercise 2.7.5.7., come up with a label
> for $\Omega$, a label for $\\{1\\}$, and a label for $\text{True}$. Given a
> label for $X$ and a label for $f$, come up with a label for $A$, a label for
> $i$, and a label for $f'$, such that the English smoothly fits the
> mathematics.

$$
\require{AMScd}
\begin{CD}
A @>{f'}>> \{1\} \\
@V{i}VV @VV{\text{True}}V \\
X @>{f}>> \Omega
\end{CD}
$$

In this case, since the bottom-right set $\Omega$ is the set of truth and
falsity, the evaluation arrow $\text{True}$ must be the binary evaluation of
some _thing_. Here is an olog:

$$
\require{AMScd}
\begin{CD}
\text{a student who earns a} \atop \text{perfect score on a final exam} @>\text{earns}>> \text{a perfect score on a final exam} \\
@VV\text{is}V @VV\text{determines}V \\
\text{a student} @>\text{earns}>> \text{a grade}
\end{CD}
$$

This follows the rules for fiber products in ologs, i.e. $A$ is notated as $X$ +
$f$ + $Y$. In this case, 

 - the subobject classifier $\Omega := \{\text{True}, \text{False}\}$ can be
   thought of as the set of pass conditions for a class, i.e. either a student
   passes ($\text{True}$) or they don't ($\text{False}$).
 - the singleon $\{1\}$ is the set of perfect scores on exams, $\{100%\}$. There
   are other scores which determine passing grades, but the mapping
   $\text{True}: \{1\}\to\Omega$ becomes "determines", which is true.
 - Like the example, $f$ and $f'$ share a label, "earns".
 - The English smoothly fits the mathematics: 
   - A student producing a perfect score on a final exam is a student. ($i: A\to
     X$)
   - A student producing  perfect score on a final exam earns a perfect score on
     a final exam. ($f': A\to\{1\}$)
   - A perfect score on a final exam determines a grade.
     ($\text{True}:\{1\}\to\Omega$)
   - A student earns a grade. ($f: X\to\Omega$)
